---
layout: post
title: "Machine Translation and Multilinguality in July 2022"
tags: [mt-weekly, en]
lang: en
---

Here is my monthly summary of what I found worth reading on arXiv in the past
month.

[A preprint from JHU](https://arxiv.org/abs/2207.05666) studies zero-shot
cross-lingual transfer using pretrained multilingual representation and comes
to the conclusion that it is an under-specified optimization problem. In other
words, with a multilingual representation model, there are potentially many
solutions that are good for the source language, but only some of them are good
for the target language. In practice, the solution is probably proper training
in the source language and few-shot training in the target language. (After
all, a zero-shot setup is always more of theoretical interest than
practical. Collecting a dozen of labeled examples should always be
possible.)

[Sockey 3, an MT toolkit by Amazon is out](https://arxiv.org/abs/2207.05851)
and is written in PyTorch (the previous versions were based on MXNet, which I
think discouraged many potential users). The pre-print claims to be as fast and
as good as Fairseq and better than OpenNMT — unfortunately, there is no
comparison with Marian.

[Google Brain introduced N-grammer](https://arxiv.org/abs/2207.06366) simple
modification of the Transformer architecture: it combines unigram and bigram
embeddings as the input. A proper bigram vocabulary would of course be enormous
(e.g., a pretty standard 32k vocabulary around 1M bigrams). The trick they go
around this is using a constant-sized hash table for storing the bigram
embeddings (with many unresolved conflicts). It seems a bit like a cross-over
between subword models and what people do in character-level models (such as
[Charformer](https://arxiv.org/abs/2106.12672)). The results look good, but the
paper only uses English.  Also, I wonder if it in fact isn't mostly
compensation for inappropriate tokenization.

A [preprint from DeepMind](https://arxiv.org/abs/2207.08583) presents a method
called MAD, which seems to me as the first reinforcement learning for MT that
seems that might work well enough, such that I would consider using it in
practice. I did not understand all the details, but my layman's interpretation
of what they do is, that it looks like the REINFORCE algorithm with a clever
baseline and clever weighting, so the variance of the training signal remains
low.

A [preprint from the University of Washing and CMU in
Pittsburgh](https://arxiv.org/abs/2207.07025) presents exciting experiments
where they formulate zero-shot machine translation as a communication game. The
baseline is doing iterated backtranslation starting from pre-trained
[mBART](https://arxiv.org/abs/2001.08210) (see my also comments in [MT Weekly
28](/2020/02/07/MT-Weekly-MBART.html)). In the communication game setup, they
add an intermediate step: they fine-tune the model to do image captioning in
English, and teach the model to play the image selection game, i.e., based on a
sentence, it should choose the correct image.  It either translates the English
caption into the target language or generates the caption in the target
language and then based on the encoder, it is supposed to recognize to what
image the caption belongs. Figure 1 of the paper shows, how the training setup
looks like ![Architecture of MT combined with emergent
communication.](/assets/emergent.png)

When combined with standard iterated back-translation, it leads to a huge
translation quality gain in high-resource languages (where doing zero-shot
translation does not make much sense) and modest improvements in low-resourced
ones.
